The profiler in R is a really handy tool
for when
you're developing larger programs or, or
doing really big data analyses.
and, and you're basically, essentially
running R code that's taking a
lot of time, or longer than, you know,
than you want to wait.
And of course that's all relative
depending
on kind of what you're working on and
what,
maybe there are some other things that you
can do in, while you're running a program.
But if something's taking a long time the
profiler is a really
handy tool to figure out exactly why it's
taking so much time
and how to, and to suggest kind of
strategies for fixing your problem.
So I'm going to talk a little bit about
using the R profiler and
our, and, and kind of talking about when
you might need to use it.
There're also some other tools that I'll
talk about that'll
help you kind of time your programs, time
your functions,
and, and so the conjunction of, of the
profile with
these other tools, is a really handy
toolbox for figuring
out how to optimize your software.
So, the first question you want to ask
yourself
is, you know, is your code actually
running slowly?
And sometimes you can solve this problem
by just you
know, running your program then going and
doing something else.
But sometimes that's not an option and you
need your program to really run quickly.
And so profiling is a general, is a
systematic way to examine
how much time is being spent in various
parts of your program.
And it's particularly useful when you're
trying
to optimize your code, you're trying to
squeeze, you know,
a lot of efficiency out of some code, And,
and
a lot of times when you first start
writing code
it, it, it runs fine, you know, when
you're running
it once, and maybe you're running a small
piece of,
of, of a function or a small piece of a
larger program, and it looks great when
you're running it,
it seems to run very quickly when you're
doing it.
But then sometimes these pieces get
embedded in a much larger program.
It may be a larger
program is running your piece a thousand
times
or five thousand times, or even ten
thousand times.
And then your one little piece, which was
running great when you were running
it, is kind of slowing down everything
else because it's being run ten thousand
times.
And so now you need to make it a
lot faster because it's being iterated
over a lot.
And so it, if profiling can come into play
when, for example if you you have a piece
of code that runs great, but then when it
gets embedded in a larger piece it starts,
it, it,
the, the it, it's speed becomes much more
noticeable.
So in general when it comes to optimizing
your code,
the, the general rule is that you
shouldn't do it.
And what I mean by that is that you
shouldn't think about it at first.
It should and, the first thing that you,
you
should think about, is is that, is kind of
how, how
to get the code to run, how to make it
readable, how to make sure that other
people can understand
what you're doing.
And because, and one of the reasons is
that it's often difficult
to understand, where exactly your program
is spending all of it's time.
And in order for you to speed up your
program, you
need to be able to know where it's
spending it's time.
And so this can't be done without any kind
of, it's difficult
to do this, I should say, without a formal
performance analysis or profiling.
And and so the basic idea is you should
always design your code first, and make
it so it's understandable and and then
after
you've got something working, then try to
optimize it.
and, and then the famous phrase is, you
know, premature optimization is the root
of all evil.
If you try to optimize first the chances
are that you'll introduce bugs before you
even have a, get a chance to kind of get
things working in the first place.
Once you've decided that you want to
optimize your code,
though, you should, you know, act like a
scientist.
Just like you would in any other context,
you should collect some data.
Alright, so if you have a sense of, of
where
your program is kind of being bogged down
or where it's spending
all it's time, you should collect the data
to figure it
out, and the way you collect the data is
by profiling.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
So, the first tool I'm going to talk about
is actually not
the profiler it's a very simple function
called system.time in R.
And what system.time does is it takes an
arbitrary R expression and evaluates that
expression and then tells you the amount
of time it took to evaluate that
expression.
Now this expression could be very simple
like a single function call, or
could be very complicated if it have to be
wrapped in curly braces.
So, it could actually be a very long
expression if you wanted to be.
So, the basic idea is that you take this
expression and it gives
you the time in seconds, that was, that
was needed to execute the expression.
If there's an error, you know, in the code
while the
expression's being evaluated, then you'll
get the time until the error occured.
now, there's two very important notions of
time
when you're exe, executing expression on,
on the computer.
The first is called the user time and this
is the
amount of time that's charged to the CPU
or CPUs for this, for running this
expression.
Okay, so this is the kind of time the
computer experiences, roughly speaking.
The elapsed time is sometimes called the
wall clock time
and this is the amount of time that you
experience.
It's alright, so the, the, so even though
you're the user you're not the user time,
you, you experience the elapsed time.
And so the two different notions
of time can kind of different importance
depending on what you care about.
So usually the user time and the elapsed
time are relatively
close, because the amount of time that the
computer spends to do
using, you know, executing your fu, your
function or expression, is roughly
equal to the amount of time you spend
waiting for it, right.
These are for standard kind of computing
types of tasks.
however, there are times when the elapsed
time will
be greater than the user time, and there
will
be times when the elapsed time is smaller
than the user time.
So in the ca, the elapsed time can be
greater than the user time, so that means
that you spend kind of more time waiting
around than
the, the computer actually spent you know,
dealing with
your code and the reason, if, and the idea
that the c, the computer may spend a lot
of time reading around for other things to
happen,
things that are maybe external to the
program itself.
And, and so the CPU doesn't actually spend
a lot of time working on your code, it
may be spending a lot of time on
other things that are going on in the
background.
If the elapsed time is smaller than the
user time this most commonly occurs if
your machine has multiple cores or
processor and
is capab, and is capable of exploiting
them.
So this, so most of the computers these
days, have at least
two, or four cores or multi core machines
and so this is
a very common situation.
However, it's not always that the compute,
the program that you're running
will be all to kind of exploit the use of
multiple cores.
In particular, R, the basic R program does
not use multiple cores as of yet.
However, it often links to libraries that
do use multiple cores, and
the most common one would be the linear
algebra type of library.
So if you're doing something like
regression,
or a lot, a lot of these prediction
routines or, or matrix computations, these
all involve linear algebra libraries.
And many of these libraries have been
optimized to use multiple cores.
And so they're, they're called
multi-threaded
BLAS libraries or, for the basic linear
algebra standard libraries, subroutines
libraries and on
the MAC sometimes called vecLib or
Accelerate.
There are more general libraries like
ATLAS
for AMD machines, there's ACML or ACML,
and
for INTEL machines there's MKL.
There's also parallel processing
libraries, for
example the parallel package which doesn't
use, which can use multiple cores but it
can also use multiple computers.
And so this will, will lead to,
potentially
lead to a program that takes more user
time than it does elapse time, and I'll
give an example of how this will work.
So, one example when elapsed time will be
bigger than
the user time, is if you read something
from the web.
So here I'm just using the read lines
function to read a web page
off off, off, off a remote server.
And you can see the elapsed time is about
0.4 seconds but the user time is about
0.004 seconds.
So the CPU actually doesn't spend a lot of
time running
this code because the chunk of the time is
just spent
waiting for the network to, or waiting for
the data to
kind of go over the network and to come
back to your computer.
And so waiting for the, the network to
kind
of deal with the data coming, going there
and
coming back, is not really part of your
program,
is part of a different thing the computer
is doing,
and so the, the amount of time executing
your program,
in the case just the readLines function,
is relatively small.
And the second example, this is where the
elapsed time is less than the
user time, I've created a simple function
which creates which creates a hilbert type
matrix.
And I calculate the singular value
decomposition
of this ma, matrix with the svd.
So the svd function makes use of
the accelerate fr framework on the Mac
and, which is a multi-threaded linear
algebra library.
And so it can take advantage of, of the
two different cores of this computer that
I'm using.
And so you can see that the user time was
roughly almost double of the elapsed time.
So the elapsed time was about 0.7 seconds
and the user time was about 1.6 seconds.
And the pa, and the reason is because the
the underlying linear algebra library
split
the computation across the two cores.
And so you can think about of it is, but
basically the elapsed
time was multiplied times two, because it
was being executed on two different CPUs.
So the amount of time that the user, the
CPU spent working on your program
was actually more than the amount of time
that you spent waiting for it to
come back.
You can time longer expressions by just
wrapping
everything in curly, a set of curly
braces.
So here I've got a four loop
here that's just generating some random
normal variables.
And you can wrap that whole thing in curly
braces and call system time around it.
And you can see that here this is
a very simple expression, it's not multi
threaded,
there's no network activity, and so the
user's
time and the elapsed time are basically
the same.
So, this is sometimes a really handy
function if you just want to take
a little bit, a little piece of code,
figure out how long it takes to
run it and, and may kind of go through a
program, maybe, expression by
expression or line by line to see which
parts are taking a lot of time.
Now the part of problem with system time
is
that it assumes that you know where to
look.
Assumes that you know where the problem is
and
that you can call system time on a given
expression.
And so, this may be useful for smaller
programs for less complicated programs
where you have a very good sense of, kind
of where the bottlenecks are.
But the question's you know what if you
don't know where to start.
What if you don't know where the problems
might be and where to start looking.
And so you need another functioner to
kind of help you along with that.